- Here we go.
(plane engine noise drowns out speech)
(dramatic music)
- Best VIP aeroplanes  that
I've seen in my career.
- Wow.
This aeroplane was built in 1979.
(engines roaring)
I guess that's the king's bathroom.
Here there's another
small, private office here.
There's a shower room.
A big conference room here.
Bodyguards probably like, sitting here.
The king's bedroom, basically.
(content sounds)
- Main equipment centre.
(dramatic music)
- Now the aeroplane will go
in the hangar to do a C check.
- [Automated Voiceover] Traffic, traffic.
- I never thought in 2019, I
could fly again on the 747SP.
This is probably the greatest
flight I have this year.
(plane engines roar)
Welcome to Hamilton, Canada.
Today, no kidding, I'm
gonna fly on a Boeing 747SP,
a VIP special aeroplane today.
(dramatic music)
- Probably one of the best VIP aeroplanes
that I've seen in my career.
- A year ago, this plane
came to our airport
and it hasn't moved since.
I'm so happy to see it leaving today.
(dramatic music)
- I was in Mauritius on my way to Paris,
then I got a call from the
owner of this company saying
"Sam, you have to come,
there's a 747SP flight ready,
today," so I just booked a flight Paris,
to Munich, to Toronto on Lufthansa, then
I'm here today, this morning.
I'd do anything to catch
a 747SP in 2018 and
this is a VIP one,
let's check it out guys.
Wow, this is amazing.
(dramatic music)
- So, this aircraft, er, had to be er,
reactivated, it was in uh,
storage for quite a number
of months, weeks and um,
basically they had to go through
and un-pickle the motors, uh
basically run up the motors.
They had to check all the
systems in the aircraft, um
from all the altimeters, the
pitot-static system, down to
the radios, um, actually all
the radios were removed from
the aircraft and put in storage.
Um, and then of course
everything else went back in
so all the systems on the
aircraft had to be verified
and functionally tested,
um, especially the motors.
Um, and now this aircraft
is deemed airworthy and
it's gonna make a ferry
flight down to Marana, Arizona
for a scheduled C check,
which is a normal process
in the maintenance life of the aircraft.
- [Sam] This is the avionics bay.
- Yeah, main equipment centre.
- [Sam] Main equipment centre, wow.
Is this where, um, all the electronics,
what kind of electronic this is?
- [Mechanic] They're radio systems.
- [Sam] Radios?
- Radios and navigation, and auto-pilots,
IRS's.
(loud whirring)
- [Mechanic] You have, up
here you have weather radar,
up there
- [Sam] It goes through the nose, right?
- [Mechanic] Yeah.
- [Sam] Okay. Wow.
Hidden equipment, I've
never seen this before.
Thanks for showing me.
(loud whirring)
- [Sam] The battery's good
and he's writing the report?
- [Man in blue trousers] He's
writing the reports, yeah.
The APU battery's not working.
- [Sam] The APU battery's not working?
But we can still fly?
- [Man in blue trousers] Yeah.
- There was a lot of work
to prepare this aeroplane
ready for this flight, to uh,
Marana, near Phoenix in Arizona.
And then, the aeroplane will
go in a hangar to do a C check,
which is a heavy maintenance check.
- [Sam] Thank you.
- Thank you, sir.
- [Sam] Thank you for all the work.
Thank you.
- Yes sir, no problem.
(engine noise drowns out speech)
- [Sam] Thank you.
(loud whirring)
- All doors closed, we're ready for depart
to Arizona, Marana.
Let me go to the cockpit to sit down.
- My name's Jeff and this is Adam.
Aeroplane is an old 747SP,
it's going to the desert
for some maintenance, it's
gonna take us about four hours
from Hamilton, Ontario,
flying at 38000 feet,
mach .86 or .87, um,
we have plenty of fuel on board,
nobody else on board,
so um, we're in a bit of
a hurry to get home, we're going fast.
- So it is shorter than
the normal, uh, 747.
But, because it's shorter,
because it doesn't carry
as much weight, it does
use the same engines and
it is a lot faster,
especially in the climb.
But once you get in the
uh, in the air, speed
is still the same with it
and the er, longer 747.
- You know, about seven and
a half tonnes an hour, up to
about 13 tonnes an hour.
- [Sam] This is the whole
aeroplane, it burns --
- That's for, that's for
all of them, yeah, all four.
- [Sam] All four engines,
13 tonnes per hour.
- Yeah.
- Okay, brake pressure, one pound, check.
- Thermometers?
- Armed and checked, right there.
- And start valve switch, armed?
(laughter)
- Eyes on the checklist, and
no eyes on the checklist,
people forget it.
(laughter)
- Alright.
- Start number four, please.
- Turning number four.
Valve open.
We're at 40.
- [Jeff] Okay, number three, please.
- [Man in striped top] Rotation.
Maximum.
- [Jeff] Okay, sir, we got three
and four started just fine,
you're cleared to, uh,
disconnect and just confirm
there's no bypass been installed here.
(loud whirring)
- [Man in striped top]
We've got 70% usually.
- N2, yeah, that's nice.
- [Man in striped top]
Yeah, here, here it comes,
I'm, I got 42 PSI we'll leave it there.
- [Jeff] I think that's enough.
Okay, sir, we got four
good starts, you're clear
to disconnect and uh, have a nice day,
thanks for the help.
Okay, watch yourself please,
flight controls, left.
(engine noise drowns out speech)
- [Man in striped top] Two full up.
Two full down.
Neutral.
(engine noise drowns out speech)
- [Adam] Clear right.
- [Jeff] Thank you.
(radio chatter)
- Full takeoff checklist.
(loud blaring)
- [Jeff] Flight controls.
Instruments?
- [Man in striped top] Check.
- Pressurisation?
- [Jeff] Set.
(engine noise drowns out speech)
- uh, check.
- Trim?
- 5.5.
- [Adam] Flaps?
10?
- [Jeff] 10, 10 green.
- [Man in striped top] Green lights.
(laughter)
- [Adam] Cabin depart?
- [Man in striped top] Uh, not required.
Cabin's here.
- Cabin crew.
Fuel system?
- [Man in striped top] Set to take off.
- [Adam] Fuel heat?
- [Man in striped top] Check.
(radio chatter)
- Uh, roger, uh, to airborne.
(loud blaring drowns out speech)
one, one niner decimal
seven, ready for takeoff
on runway three-zero.
Lights and strobes?
- [Jeff] They are on.
Here we go.
(engine noise drowns out speech)
Uh, just stand them up vertical and then.
- Okay.
(engine noise drowns out speech)
Stabilised.
- [Jeff] Your thrust.
- [Adam] Centres.
(plane audibly accelerates)
(engine noise drowns out speech)
- [Adam] 80 knots.
- [Jeff] You want it?
Go take it.
How's the climb?
(engine noise drowns out speech)
(dramatic music)
- Wow, it's just unbelievable.
We got this plane took
off and now we're cruising
at 38000 feet in the blue sky.
I'm a bit exhausted to be
honest, I flew 32 hours
from Mauritius, to Paris, to
Munich, to Toronto last night.
Um, just to get on this
plane because I'm determined
to fly the SP one more time and
this is a VIP head of state,
so this is extra bonus.
I'm gonna give you guys
a tour now, alright?
This is the upper deck, as you can see.
And on the upper deck
there's 12 La-Z-Boy seats
and really, really wide and really, really
good leg room here.
So I'm gonna show you, see
these beautiful, blue-colored
bins, huge leg room, really amazing.
Let me recline.
Oh, it actually is almost
like a flat bed, deep recline.
(electronic lounge music)
I'm walking towards the back
here, here this is a galley
on the upper deck, a small
galley, for 12 passengers
on the upper deck.
So now, let's continue the
tour, going downstairs,
take a look.
Oh, I love this spiral
staircase, isn't that great?
Okay.
Alright, let's start with
the top at the 747 nose.
The 747 nose on this plane
is actually a bathroom.
(electronic lounge music)
I guess that's the king's bathroom.
And there's a seat here
and there's a toilet
and there's a beautiful,
beautiful, um wash basin here.
Let me sit on the king's toilet seat.
(laughter)
One day my life became a king.
Wow, a golden water hose.
Everything on the plane here is like,
it's just luxury, extreme gold.
All right, follow me and let's
go to the next, next room
is the king's bedroom
basically, as you can see,
it's right at the quietest
zone, which is the nose zone,
the bathroom and the bedroom here.
I'm tempted to try out the bed.
(content noises)
This is incredible.
(electronic lounge music)
I'm the only passenger on this SP flight
and now I really feel
like I'm the king here,
and I actually have the
whole flight to myself,
unbelievable, such an experience.
There's a controller here, I can push
and then now the bed's coming up.
You can actually adjust
your bed up to your liking,
going up and down with all
the push of a button here.
Hey, let's continue the
tour to the next cabin here,
walking past the entrance of the stairs,
now this is the best room, this
is the conference room here.
(electronic lounge music)
But the best seat here on
the whole plane probably,
is this seat here, the blue colour.
This is for the king, the throne.
Feels like a king here,
with all my ministers
and all my entourage and followship here.
(electronic lounge music)
This seat is so comfortable,
I actually didn't want
to leave here, but
let's continue the tour.
I want to show you more about this plane.
This is a passage, onto the next room.
Okay, there's actually a galley here.
Let's continue.
So now, I'm coming to a, uh,
very big conference room here.
This is also a great
dining room, I believe.
(electronic lounge music)
Look at these paintings.
I don't have to tell you
where the ex-owner comes from,
as you can probably guess it right.
And look at this, a showcase.
Wow, everything is, wow,
those are cup holders
and then plate holders.
Beautiful showcase.
And then walking continuing down, you see
some sofa on the aisle,
this is probably for
the bodyguard.
(electronic lounge music)
So the bodyguard's probably
sitting on the sofa outside,
attending to any calls from the ruler.
After the dining hall here
there's another small,
private office here, as you can see.
(electronic lounge music)
And inside here, there's a shower room.
The shower room is here, you can tell.
We can go inside having a shower here.
Whoa, but today, because the
plane just came out of storage,
there's no water on the plane,
so I can't enjoy a shower.
(electronic lounge music)
And then towards the end
of the plane, there's for
the entourage, maybe for
the journalist, minister.
There's a lot of business
class La-Z-Boy chairs again.
(electronic lounge music)
And towards the end of the plane,
this is where economy class is sitting
and probably for the
servants and entourage.
And then, what's interesting,
is on the side bin here,
and these are extra, extra
large bins, look at this.
Whoa, very large bins.
And there's extra side
storage bins, probably
for some cargoes.
And then there is a
galley at the very end.
A 747SP galley.
(electronic lounge music)
I'm just walking back, from
all the way at the end of
the plane, to the front of the plane.
As you can see, all the cabin here.
(electronic lounge music)
Okay, this is the end of the
747SP tour, back to where
I started with the VIP toilet
at the front of the nose.
Well guys, I've shown you
every part of this plane.
Tell me which part's your
favourite, leave your comments.
Did you like the uh, bedroom in the nose?
Or did you like the middle, the lounge,
with the king's seats?
Or did you like the
dining lounge, here where
I'm sitting right now, or the
back end, where the entourage?
Or the upper deck, tell
me in your comments.
(electronic lounge music)
(plane engines roaring)
On the flight, Jack came down, Jack is
my flight engineer today on the SP flight.
Jack is the pilot and
engineer on Air Force One.
The VC-1,
the VC-137, right?
- Yeah, VC-137 and the VC-25 747.
- VC-25 is the 747 Air Force One.
- Yes.
- And you're one of the first
flight engineers on that?
- Yes, yes the first cruise.
- I am so lucky today, to have you.
Of course, a VIP plane
like this, we need to have
the best engineer and best pilot.
- [Jack] I'm the second from the top-left.
- [Sam] You're the
second from the top-left?
- [Jack] Yes. Yep that's me.
- [Sam] There you go.
Wow, you're an Air Force One pilot, Jack.
And this photo is?
- [Jack] That's the Oval
Office Christmas uh, 1988.
- [Sam] Oh my God, that's
president Ronald Reagan.
- [Jack] Yep.
- [Sam] Where are you, Jack?
- [Jack] I'm to the, I'm to the, uh,
I'm right here.
- [Sam] Wow.
- [Jack] I'm that one.
Talk about the history of this aeroplane.
This aeroplane was built in
1979, delivered to Pan Am.
In 1986, it was sold to United Airlines.
In 1995, the Qatar Amiri
Flight picked up this aeroplane
and used it until 2018.
Since then, it was parked
at Hamilton airport
and today, I am on this ferry
flight to Marana, Arizona.
This aeroplane will go in for
a C check, looking for a buyer.
(radio chatter)
So today's flight's ferry
flight, I'm the only passenger.
I'm also, I guess, the chief
cabin crew and flight attendant
and um, we have a lot of drinks
stored in the fridge here,
which is self-serve.
We got Gatorade, we got Diet Pepsi
and all the drinks are stored here.
And then we have club sandwiches snack.
I'm enjoying my lunch, club sandwich, on
the upper deck of the SP seat.
(engines roaring)
We're over New Mexico, now.
The views out there's just beautiful,
the clouds broken up and watching
the wings on the SP, flying
38000 feet's such a treat.
I never thought in 2019, I
could fly again on the 747SP.
This is probably the greatest
flight I have this year.
(dramatic music)
I actually been sitting on
different part of the plane on
this flight, it's a pretty
long flight, four hours.
I think I'm still in a dream.
I'm sitting in the king's seat here,
what's incredible is this is actually
an electric-controlled
seat, so you can actually
lower yourself into a
full sleeping position on
the seat as well, like I'm lowering now.
(dramatic music)
(engines roaring)
- [Automated Voiceover] Traffic, traffic.
(dramatic music)
- 747 turning final,
for runway three-zero.
(dramatic music)
- [Jeff] Runway's in sight, landing.
Little fast, right now.
(plane engines roaring)
[Sam] 100.
- [Automated Voiceover] 100.
50.
30.
20.
10.
(drone of engines drowns out speech)
- [Jeff] Manual braking.
- 80 knots.
(drone of engines drowns out speech)
- Alright, everything down.
(engines roaring)
- [Jeff] It should be parked
right over here, where all
the Air Canadas are.
- [Adam] Right.
(engines roaring)
- [Jeff] Brakes are set.
(drone of the plane drowns out speech)
- [Jack] Oh, hey, alright.
- Here I just arrived, sunny Arizona, wow.
The weather's beautiful here.
Just arrived in style
on a private, VIP 747.
But who would've thought, in 2019,
I could still fly a 747SP?
Well, I hope you enjoyed the ride with me
and thank you so much for watching.
(dramatic music)